Circuit description for uStar battery board as of 7-4-2020
--------------------------------------------

Overview

The purpose of the circuit is to monitor the state of the battery charge and to disconnect the power supply from the consumers 
when the charge is nearly depleted in order for the solar cells to bring the charge up to nominal before normal function resumes.

The power source consists of 3 NIMH or NICD cells connected in series and connected through micro switches to the circuit. Before 
the cube sat is released into orbit the switches are held open via the launch tube and spring closed as soon as the device is released.

A boost regulator is permanently connected to the V-Battery net, boosting and stabilizing the nominal 3.6V battery voltage to 5V.  
The 5V from the regulator is used as the reference and the VCC of the timing and disconnect circuit, but doesn't leave the board. 

Two MOS-FET connected in series conduct the current from the battery to the off board consumers via round hole connection H14, JP1-2 and 
USB connector pin4. Each FET is controlled by a circuit path that disables momentarily or for a long time the connection of the power source 
to the consumers. 

The lower part of the circuit disables the consumers for about two hours if the battery voltage falls  below a certain voltage for a certain time.
The upper part disables the consumers momentarily only.

A sub circuit attempts to provide a suicide mechanism for the uP to disconnect itself from power. It can't function as designed.


Detailed Description

The general logic behind this circuit escapes me. Looking at the schematic I doubt that it performs the function as intended. 

Current path from Battery to consumers is through the following parts:

	Ground: H3,H5,H7,H8,H21, micro switch - H22 - Battery minus
	Plus:   Battery plus, H17 - micro switch - H18 - Q3 - Q1 - H14,Jp1-2,USB-4
	
	Note: Q3,Q1 form a logic AND, doubling the on resistance, Q1,Q3 undersized for current, Trace work undersized for current.
		  Solar cells presumably connected to pins/holes labeled "Super-caps", but no reverse flow diodes present leading to discharge 
		  of battery while stored. 
	
	

Momentary power Disconnect: 

	IC1, Q3 and C5,R16 form a circuit that disconnects the consumer (uP and all) if the battery voltage drops below 2.9V* (theorry, see below) 
	for a fraction of a second, then keeps the power disconnected until the battery voltage rises above 3.03V*. This disconnect time will be 
	short, since as soon as the consumers are disconnected, the battery voltage will rise and the device will re-enable the consumers again. 
	This will lead to a slow oscillation of the power bus between on and off.
	TC of C5,R16 is 5.6sec, but change required is only from 3.03V* down to 2.9V* to trigger disconnect.
	
 	IC1 is a uP voltage monitor chip that is meant to be connected to the reset or an other interrupt line on the uP, so that it can determine 
	a low voltage situation. Most uP however have a "brownout" circuit built in these days that would be used instead. 
	IC1 is not meant to be used as a battery monitor as it doesn't have a hysteresis that is matched to the battery chemistry to function as such. 

*)	IC1 is used in a non standard configuration in this circuit. It's VCC line is not directly connected to VCC, but through a rather high value (560K) 
	resistor. Due to that resistance and the leakage current in C5 in addition to the operating current requirement of IC1 the theoretical
	switching thresholds as mentioned above are not in effect in this case. 

	As measured, the low threshold of the actual circuit is at 3.35 V and the high threshold at 3.45 V. This means that the shut down of the load is 
	done through the IC1 3.35V thresholdinstead of at 3.26V by the timed lockout. Since the IC1 disconnect voltage is higher than the timed lockout voltage
	it is likely that the powerbus oscillates between 3.35V and 3.45 V when decaying and only goes into timed lockout when it has further decayd beyond
	the 3.26V of the timing circuit threshold. 
	
	
Long term timing of consumers for battery charge up (revised after change of SMITT trigger logic)

	The circuit comprised of C4,R6,R7, IC:SAFE, SMITT1,2,3, Q1 and Pololu 5V boost regulator. The Pololu regulator is essential in the circuit as it provides
	the power and reference for it. It starts operating at 2.3V, below that it's output is at or near zero. Current consumption before it starts to operate 
	is minimal.
	
	The intent here is to disable the consumers if it has been detected that the battery voltage 
	has been low in order for the solar cells to have enough time to recharge the batteries  without 
	ending up in a power bus oscillation. 
	
	Upon initial connect of the a battery thats is charged the load gets turned on for ~12 seconds, followed by a long (2-4hr) period of disconnect
	until the load is reconnected and normal operation starts.   
	
Step by Step description.	
	
	IC "SAFE" is a high side current monitor device that is used in a simple voltage comparator mode. It flips it's output  LOW when 
	V-Battery is below 3.26V ( 1.09V/cell) for >~12 seconds. SMITT1 inverts that signal. 
	
	R1-C1-R18 makes a RC network with a TC of 10S for charge and TC 91 min for discharge. Similarly R3,C3,R4 makes a RC network with 
	TC=10sec for charge and TC=141 minutes for discharge. Calculated times are going to be incorrect because of the unknown leakage in the
	super capacitors and the electron re-emergence ( battery effect) and the uncertainty of the thresholds
	of the smitt trigger inputs  makes calculating the actual times a futile exercise. The times mentioned below are measured from 
	an actual circuit.
	
	
	When the device initially is connected to a charged battery all capacitors are discharged. 	IC "SAFE" detects a 
	low battery condition for ~19 seconds while C4 is being charged up via R6. During this time it's output is held low. Smitt1 inverts this to a 
	high which through D8 and R1 starts charging up C1. After 6 seconds of initial turn on the voltage has risen above the Vt+ on Smitt3 and it's 
	output switches from low to high. This starts the charge up of C3 through D2 and R3. After an other 6 seconds the voltage on C3 has now risen above Vt+ 
	of Smitt and its output changes from low to high. Now at T+12 seconds the FET Q1 is controlled to open, disconnecting the load from the battery. 
	
	Meanwhile at T+12s, the input on IC "SAFE" still has not risen enough to indicate that the battery is fully charged and therefore SMITT1 keeps charging C1 for
	7 more seconds to reach 4.2V.
	
	When IC "SAFE" at T+19sec recognizes the battery is at nominal voltage it flips it's output low and SMITT1 stops charging C1. SMITT3 still sees the high
	on it's input and keeps charging C3 while C1 now starts the slow discharge through R18 (measured at 50 minutes). When the voltage on C1 finally falls under Vt- SMITT3 flips
	and stops charging C3, leading the way for it's slow discharge as well. C3 was charged up to 4.9V and it will have to discharge down to Vt- of SMITT2 before 
	it's output flips and re-enables the load again. This discharge time was measured at 105 minutes. 
	
	The total lock out time of the board analysed came to 2Hrs and 35 min, (50 + 105). These times are consitent with the calculations of the RC time 
	constants found on the board, considering the unknown value of the cacaitor leackage. The time will vary greatly with temperatur and to a lesser degree
	with the actual voltage of the battery. It will also vary greatly with the actual SMITT trigger devices soldered as the thresholds on these have a wide
	margin from unit to unit. 


	A similar sequence arises when the circuit actually detects a low voltage condition at V-Battery of less than 3.26V (delayed by C4). 
	While the condition exists SMITT1 starts charging up C1. When SMITT3 sees Vt+ after about 6 seconds it flips it's output high and starts charging C3, 
	which in turn, after an other 6 seconds, flips SMITT2 disconnecting the load.  After the load is disconnected IC "SAFE", not having any hysteresis, will
	detect good voltage and stop C1 from being charged any further. This leaves C1 at a lower voltage compared to the initial case above and
	subsequently it's discharge time is less and the total load lock out time is less.  
		
Power consumption:
	While the circuit consumes about 2.5ma continuously while in its monitoring state it has come to light that it consumes a considerable amount of power 
	while timing the lockout of the load during the 2.5Hrs.  Starting out at 2.5ma the current consumption linearly rises to 46 ma during the first timing phase
	of 50 minutes, then drops momentarily to 5ms to linearly rise to 46 ma again during the second timing phase of ~105 minutes. 

	
H16-Q2 - Shutdown.

This circuit can not work as intended. First Q2 and Pololu-5V  would experience current overload if Q2 was switched on when C3 was discharged.


Shortcomings:

Using SuperCaps for timing of long periods is problematic. Not only do super caps vary their value from one device to the next, but with every conceivable 
environmental change and age as well. Making a repeatable circuit around timing derived from electret or super caps is virtually impossible without individual
selecting of components per each board. 

The use of components not intended for the purpose, such as the current monitor and Voltage supervisor is not a good practise.

The power consumption during the load lockout time in the smitt triggers is roughly 1/3 of the the charge budget. Even the quiescent power consumption of 2.2 ma
during normal operation is exceptionally high. 


	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 	
	
	
	
	
	